SYNOPSIS (ABSTRACT)

The Variants and Vastness of Ceramic Vessels

Olivia Kasmin, 2026

I’m visualizing the silhouettes of ceramic vessels across time and space to show the similarities in the shapes of these forms despite the great diversity in their origin. We, as humans, have had an inclination to make objects to contain things out of pottery since as early as ~10,000 B.C.E., and we continue to live with vessels that serve purposes in our lives from spiritual to daily use, or simply as decorative objects that we like to have around. Ceramic vessels, that is to say, containers that can be used to hold liquids and are made out of clay that has been fired, have been used to store wine, transport water, be placed in graves, or simply hold flowers. 

The purpose a vessel, the constraints of the medium itself and the making of the object with one’s hands of course all contribute to the form and size, but it is still remarkable that despite such great advances in technology we continue coming back to this very human nature to make something with our hands that we can hold, carry, and collect. 

My primary dataset will be images of ceramic vessels from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, including objects titled “vessel”, and also “vases”, “pots” and “jugs”, which fall within the vessel category; in this collection, vases alone number approximately 4,000. I may also supplement this data with images from other museum collections such as the V&A Museum or the British Museum. The images will be analyzed using machine learning processes to extract a calculation for their silhouette shape, and other metadata will be used to highlight historical and cultural similarities and differences. 

Ceramic vessels are still made today in wildly different circumstances - by people in rural communities in India to hobbyists in Brooklyn studios. Ceramics have spanned every strata of culture and blur the lines between fine art and craft. As someone who makes ceramics myself, I find this connection to people across the globe and to ancestors who lived thousands of years ago and who also shaped clay with their hands to be very humbling; in some ways, we’re all the same. I’d like to share this very simple observation and meditative feeling with a wide audience through a digital presentation. 

I believe the attractiveness of the clarity of forms of these objects is a compelling entry point for people who have never before thought about ceramics to connect with a new art form, as well as for art historians already passionate about the subject to analyze them through a new lens. This project will be very aesthetically driven - the silhouette of the forms will be displayed without any other details of the objects (such as decoration or color) so that the pure outlines may drive the narrative to highlight continuity, and then later reveal the historical and cultural context of each vessel. 
